gh-101000: Add os.path.splitroot() (#101002)
python/cpython: Doc/library/os.path.rst

      Accepts a :term:`path-like object`.

.. function:: splitroot(path)

   Split the pathname *path* into a triad ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:

>    1. *drive* is an optional mount point, exactly like :func:`splitdrive`;

Reviewer: I sympathise with the desire to keep repetition out of the docs, but I think it'll be friendlier to readers if we restate the description of _drive_ here, rather than forcing them to click through to the `splitdrive` function docs to find out when _drive_ will be an empty string or not.

Also, as a "typing guy" at heart -- "optional" has a special meaning for users of typing, where it means "could be `None`. I like the more explicit "Could be something meaningful, or the empty string" description in the `splitdrive()` docs.

   2. *root* is an optional sequence of separators following the drive; and
   3. *tail* is anything after the root.

>    On Posix, *drive* is always empty. The *root* may be empty (relative path),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   On Posix systems, *drive* is always empty. The *root* may be empty (if it is a relative path),
```

>    a single forward slash (absolute path), or two forward slashes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   a single forward slash (if it is an absolute path), or two forward slashes
```

>    (implementation-defined per the POSIX standard).

Reviewer: What's the "POSIX standard"? Can that be linked to?

Reviewer 2: POSIX stands for Portable Operating System Interface ([POSIX.1 FAQ](https://www.opengroup.org/austin/papers/posix_faq.html)). The following is the relevant statement from the [pathname resolution](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap04.html#tag_04_13) discussion in IEEE Std 1003.1-2017:

> If a pathname begins with two successive \<slash\> characters, the first component following the leading \<slash\> characters may be interpreted in an implementation-defined manner, although more than two leading \<slash\> characters shall be treated as a single \<slash\> character.

>    On Windows, *drive* may be a UNC sharepoint or a traditional DOS drive. The

Reviewer: This is the first use of the term "DOS" in this document -- can we link to a definition of the term?

   *root* may be empty, a forward slash, or a backward slash.

   In all cases, ``drive + root + tail`` will be the same as *path*.

>    .. versionadded:: 3.12

Reviewer: It would be nice to add a short doctest example, similar to `os.path.splitdrive` immediately above. Also: I think this deserves an entry in "What's New in Python 3.12"!

      Accepts a :term:`path-like object`.

.. function:: splitroot(path)

   Split the pathname *path* into a triad ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:

>    1. *drive* is a mount point or the empty string;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. *drive* is a device name, mount point or the empty string;
```

The `spltdrive()` documentation says that a drive is a mount point, but that's not generally true. A mount point is a path that's mounted by a filesystem directory. A UNC share is a mount point for a redirected or virtual filesystem, but a drive such as "D:" is usually the name of a volume device. The automatic mount point is the root path "D:\\", assuming the volume is even formatted.

Mapped drives and substitute drives are logical device names, though they can behave more like symlinks. For an example of the latter, if substitute drive "S:" targets "\\??\\C:\\Windows\\System32", then a relative symlink "S:\\link.exe" -> "..\\notepad.exe" resolves to "C:\\Windows\\notepad.exe". If "S:" were a real device name, then trying to traverse "S:\\link.exe" would fail as invalid.

As a pure path operation, we don't check the device type or whether it exists. Any device name is accepted as a drive, including known serial devices such as "\\\\.\\NUL", "\\\\.\\CON" and "\\\\.\\COM1".

   2. *root* is a sequence of separators following the drive or the empty string; and
   3. *tail* is anything after the root.

   On POSIX systems, *drive* is always empty. The *root* may be empty (if *path* is
   relative), a single forward slash (if *path* is absolute), or two forward slashes
   (implementation-defined per `IEEE Std 1003.1 2013 Edition; 4.13 Pathname Resolution
   <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap04.html#tag_04_13>`_.)
   For example::

      >>> splitroot('/etc/hosts')
      ('', '/', 'etc/hosts')

>    On Windows, *drive* may be a UNC sharepoint or a traditional drive-letter drive. The
>    *root* may be empty, a forward slash, or a backward slash. For example::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   On Windows, *drive* may be a drive-letter name, a UNC share, or a device
   name. The *root* may be empty, a forward slash, or a backward slash. For
   example::
```

>       >>> splitroot('//server/share/')
>       ('//server/share', '/', '')
>       >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Barney')
>       ('C:', '/', 'Users/Barney')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Barney')
      ('C:', '/', 'Users/Barney')
      >>> splitroot('//server/share/')
      ('//server/share', '/', '')
      >>> splitroot('//?/Volume{12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456781234}/')
      ('//?/Volume{12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456781234}', '/', '')
```

   Split the pathname *path* into a 3-item tuple ``(drive, root, tail)`` where
   *drive* is a device name or mount point, *root* is a string of separators
   after the drive, and *tail* is everything after the root. Any of these
   items may be the empty string. In all cases, ``drive + root + tail`` will
   be the same as *path*.

   On POSIX systems, *drive* is always empty. The *root* may be empty (if *path* is
   relative), a single forward slash (if *path* is absolute), or two forward slashes
   (implementation-defined per `IEEE Std 1003.1-2017; 4.13 Pathname Resolution
   <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap04.html#tag_04_13>`_.)
   For example::

      >>> splitroot('/home/sam')
      ('', '/', 'home/sam')
      >>> splitroot('//home/sam')
      ('', '//', 'home/sam')
      >>> splitroot('///home/sam')
      ('', '/', '//home/sam')

   On Windows, *drive* may be empty, a drive-letter name, a UNC share, or a device
   name. The *root* may be empty, a forward slash, or a backward slash. For
   example::

      >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Sam')
      ('C:', '/', 'Users/Sam')
      >>> splitroot('//Server/Share/Users/Sam')

>       ('//Server/Share', '/', 'Users/Sam')

Reviewer: Maybe some of these examples should use `bytes` instead of strings, since the function works with `bytes` just as well.

Also, does the function work with `os.PathLike` objects? If so, should we state that explicitly? If not, should it?

Reviewer 2: Support for `bytes` and `os.PathLike` objects is mentioned in the first paragraph of the `os.path` documentation.

> This module implements some useful functions on pathnames. To read or write files see [open()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#open), and for accessing the filesystem see the [os](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html#module-os) module. The path parameters can be passed as strings, or bytes, or any object implementing the [os.PathLike](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html#os.PathLike) protocol.

Reviewer: None of the existing examples in this module use `bytes` examples, but I'd still be tempted to have one or two of the examples here use `bytes` paths. It can't hurt, in my opinion:

```suggestion
      >>> splitroot('/home/sam')
      ('', '/', 'home/sam')
      >>> splitroot('//home/sam')
      ('', '//', 'home/sam')
      >>> splitroot(b'///home/sam')
      (b'', b'/', b'//home/sam')

   On Windows, *drive* may be empty, a drive-letter name, a UNC share, or a device
   name. The *root* may be empty, a forward slash, or a backward slash. For
   example::

      >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Sam')
      ('C:', '/', 'Users/Sam')
      >>> splitroot(b'//Server/Share/Users/Sam')
      (b'//Server/Share', b'/', b'Users/Sam')
```

Author: Byte paths are a niche tool on POSIX. They're used because POSIX pathnames aren't guaranteed to conform to any particular encoding, and so highly portable applications will use `bytes` to avoid guessing.

I'm not aware of any use case for them on Windows. AFAIK they're supported only for conformity with POSIX.

I think we'd be drawing undeserved attention to them if we include them in the examples. It also makes the differences between the examples harder to grok, I think.

Reviewer: Alright, let's leave this as it is then! Thanks!

Author: Hope that's alright! Thanks.

> 

Reviewer: Should only have one newline here, rather than two

```suggestion
```

      Accepts a :term:`path-like object`.

.. function:: splitroot(path)

>    Split the pathname *path* into a triad ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:

Reviewer 2: This would the only use of ["triad"](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/triad#Noun) in the source code and documentation. I'm used to either ["3-tuple"](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/-tuple#Suffix) or ["triple"](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/triple#Noun) in this context.

```suggestion
   Split the pathname *path* into a 3-tuple of strings ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:
```

Reviewer: Oh, I quite like "triad" here — for me it's quite clear and succinct.

Author: I picked "triad" rather than "triple" because `splitdrive()` uses "pair" rather than "double". But honestly I don't mind "triple" if that's more obvious.

I don't like `3-tuple` because the bit in monospace already makes it obvious that it's a tuple. We could make that work by adjusting it as follows:

> Split the *path* into a 3-item tuple of strings *drive*, *root* and *tail*, where:

I'm borrowing "n-item tuple" from the `urllib.parse` docs as I have them to hand.

Author: ```suggestion
   Split the pathname *path* into a triple ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:
```

Reviewer: I like "3-item tuple" or "triad". Not so keen on "3-tuple" or "triple".

Reviewer 2: When I search the web for "triad" used with "tuple", I do come across "triad" to mean a 3-item ordered sequence. So maybe it's just me. It's not as common as "triple" or "3-tuple", however. I also like "3-item tuple".

The term "tuple" is a generalization of the words double, triple, quadruple, quintuple, and so on, which are based on Latin words that combine a number (e.g. duo, tres, quattor, quintus) and "-plus" (i.e. English "-fold").

Author: The docs for `os.walk()` use "3-tuple" and "triple". There's plenty of other occurences of "triple"; less of "3-tuple".

What don't you like about "triple", Alex?

Reviewer: I've seen "triple" used in the CPython docs in a few other places, but I've never seen it used as a noun outside the CPython docs. I know it _can_ be used as a noun, but I think technical documentation should generally strive to be clear to laypeople, not just people who are used to reading technical documentation. (There are obviously limits to how far you should take that principle, but it seems like a good principle to aspire towards.) Part of that, in my opinion, means using words in the same way that people will be used to seeing them used in contexts outside of technical documentation.

Reviewer: Anyway, it sounds like we all like "3-item tuple", so why don't we just go with that? :)

Author: ```suggestion
   Split the pathname *path* into a 3-item tuple ``(drive, root, tail)`` where:
```

   1. *drive* is a device name, mount point or the empty string;

>    2. *root* is a sequence of separators following the drive or the empty string; and

Reviewer: I don't like the word "sequence" here — my immediate reaction is "what kind of sequence? A list? A tuple? A deque?" That said, I'm struggling to think of something better :(

Author: perhaps "a string of separators"?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. *root* is either one or more separators that follow the drive or the
      empty string; and
```

Reviewer: Or perhaps:

```suggestion
   2. *root* is either a string of one or more separators that follow the drive, or
      the empty string; and
```

Author: Personally I don't think "one or more" is necessary; we get into the details in the following paragraphs. The "more" could also give the impression that _any number_ of separators are included in the root, which isn't the case.

```suggestion
   2. *root* is a string of separators that follow the drive, or the empty string; and
```

   3. *tail* is anything after the root.

   On POSIX systems, *drive* is always empty. The *root* may be empty (if *path* is
   relative), a single forward slash (if *path* is absolute), or two forward slashes

>    (implementation-defined per `IEEE Std 1003.1 2013 Edition; 4.13 Pathname Resolution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   (implementation-defined per `IEEE Std 1003.1-2017; 4.13 Pathname Resolution
```

   <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap04.html#tag_04_13>`_.)
   For example::

>       >>> splitroot('/etc/hosts')
>       ('', '/', 'etc/hosts')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      >>> splitroot('home/barney')
      ('', '', 'home/barney')
      >>> splitroot('/home/barney')
      ('', '/', 'home/barney')
      >>> splitroot('//home/barney')
      ('', '//', 'home/barney')      
      >>> splitroot('///home/barney')
      ('', '/', '//home/barney')
```

Author: Perhaps getting too long IMHO. @AlexWaygood what do you think? (and below)

Reviewer 2: The example with a relative path could be skipped as something most people will understand intuitively. I think it's helpful to show "/" vs "//" vs "///", or at least "//" vs "///". I think the result with "//" may be surprising because Linux and macOS handle it the same as "/" and "///".

Reviewer: No other function in this document has a code block with more than two examples, so I agree that four examples here would be too many.

The last example _is_ somewhat surprising (to me at least), so I'd definitely keep that one. Perhaps the second could be skipped.

Reviewer 2: If I had to choose just two Unix examples, I'd opt for the following:

```
      >>> splitroot('/home/barney')
      ('', '/', 'home/barney')
      >>> splitroot('//home/barney')
      ('', '//', 'home/barney')
```

With three examples, I'd add the triple slash example: 

```
      >>> splitroot('///home/barney')
      ('', '/', '//home/barney')
```

I prefer for the examples to be similar in terms of component names, which emphasizes at a glance how the paths are syntactically different in terms of slashes.

Reviewer: I'll defer to yours and Barney's superior expertise on paths as to which specific ones are kept, but four is definitely too many for me :)

I'd prefer two, but I think I could tolerate three, if necessary.

Author: I've opted for 3 so we can include the triple-slash case, which I agree is surprising to newcomers.

      >>> splitroot('//home/eryk')
      ('', '//', 'home/eryk')
      >>> splitroot('///home/eryk')

>       ('', '/', '//home/eryk')

Reviewer 2: This is your idea and PR, and an extension of your ongoing work on pathlib. Please credit yourself (e.g. "/home/barney"). You definitely deserve it.

Author: Still, it feels a bit self-serving to plaster my name all over the `os.path` docs! I'll pick a neutral name.

>       >>> splitroot('Windows/notepad')
>       ('', '', 'Windows/notepad')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      >>> splitroot('Users/Barney')
      ('', '', 'Users/Barney')
      >>> splitroot('/Users/Barney')
      ('', '/', 'Users/Barney')
```

Reviewer: This doesn't seem necessary to me -- I think it can be inferred from the example immediately below. We should keep the docs here relatively terse, in keeping with the rest of the `os.path` documentation.

Reviewer 2: If I had to choose just two Windows examples, I'd choose the following:

```
      >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Barney')
      ('C:', '/', 'Users/Barney')
      >>> splitroot('//Server/Share/Users/Barney')
      ('//Server/Share', '/', 'Users/Barney')
```

With 3 examples, I'd add a "//?/UNC" device example:

```
      >>> splitroot('//?/UNC/Server/Share/Users/Barney')
      ('//?/UNC/Server/Share', '/', 'Users/Barney')
```

Author: I've opted for 2 examples in this case as I think the `//?/UNC` behaviour should be obvious enough if you're using those sorts of paths.

      >>> splitroot('C:/Users/Barney')
      ('C:', '/', 'Users/Barney')
      >>> splitroot('//server/share/')
      ('//server/share', '/', '')

>       >>> splitroot('//?/Volume{12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456781234}/')
>       ('//?/Volume{12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456781234}', '/', '')

Reviewer 2: The GUID device example is too long. Switch to UNC.

```suggestion
      >>> splitroot('//?/UNC/server/share/')
      ('//?/UNC/server/share', '/', '')
```
